Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Charles Sheffield is a relatively new name in the field of science fiction, but he's
published first class stories and novels since 1976.
Sheffield is a practicing scientist and as you might expect his work can be categorized
as hard science fiction.
His novels include Sight of Proteus, Web Between the Worlds and My Brother's Keeper.
He's also had three volumes of short stories published.
We spoke with Sheffield recently and asked him how he first got involved in science fiction.
I read it from the time I was about 13 or 14 years old, but where I was living the idea
of fandom was unknown at the time.
I was raised in East Yorkshire in England and so far as I knew for a long time, in fact,
until I went off to the university, I was the only person I knew who read science fiction.
And then when I got to the university, I found it was not all that uncommon, but at least
until I was 18, it was a private activity and there was no organized effort.
There were no groups of people discussing it, there were no conventions or anything like
that.
It was a solitary reading activity.
And I got into it simply because I was interested in science and it was the only type of writing,
apart from science fact, that appealed to someone interested in science.
There wasn't much of it around, of course.
The period I'm talking about, there were no English magazines that I recall and about
the only things that came over from the United States were astounding, which then became analog
and galaxy and occasionally amazing stories and fantastic stories and that was about it.
We asked Sheffield if he had had a long apprenticeship with rejection slips before selling his first
story.
It was a reasonably long one.
I can't say that I had an endless string of rejections.
I started to write in 76 and didn't have any previous background of trying to write fiction
of any kind.
So I wasn't too discouraged because I realized in my first story or two that I was evolving
rapidly.
In other words, I could reread things of a few months before and say, my lord, no wonder
nobody would buy that.
But once Sheffield hit his stride, his stories became familiar to readers of the science
fiction magazines.
They were always exciting and inventive.
Sheffield, as we mentioned earlier, belongs to that small group of science fiction writers
who are practicing scientists.
He has a degree in theoretical physics and is a vice president of the Earth Satellite
Corporation of Washington, D.C.
We asked him what the corporation does.
What we do is we take information from satellites that look at the Earth as opposed to looking
out in space somewhere and we use that information in looking for natural resources on the Earth
and in measuring them and monitoring them.
So for instance, we have exploration programs in which we look for oil and gas and minerals
around the world.
We have other projects in which we analyze the condition of surface water or of land
use.
We're just finishing a big project for the state of Pennsylvania looking at their abandoned
mine lands to see what condition they're in.
And that's done sometimes from aerial observations in aircraft, but mostly we use satellite data.
And the company is now approaching 13 years old and in a sense was started too soon.
I was there at the beginning, but our first few years were very difficult because we found
that we were in a field in which almost no one knew what we were doing and we would spend
lots of our time trying to explain to people the potential that we believed we could see
in the field.
Well now, enough people have seen examples of it that we find it much easier.
So things have become much smoother for the company in the last few years.
Next time we'll talk with Charles Sheffield about his work.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Charles Sheffield's popular and provocative 1979 novel, The Web Between the Worlds, concerns
a so-called space elevator.
A space elevator is a satellite that is tethered to the Earth.
Of course it would always remain above the same spot on the Earth's surface, or in other
words, it would be in geosynchronous orbit.
Sheffield has his engineers build a satellite in the tether, which is hundreds of kilometers
long, out in space.
The end of this beanstalk, as it's called, is then guided toward a point on the Earth's
equator.
A huge hole is waiting for it.
As the end of the beanstalk enters the hole, millions of tons of dirt and rock are exploded
over it, firmly anchoring it.
Since Sheffield is a practicing physicist, he describes the whole touchy operation in
believable scientific language.
We ask him, though, if this method of anchoring a space elevator is a feasible one.
In other words, what you've got to do is to make sure there's just enough mass at the
bottom sitting there.
Now, there's several ways you could propose to do that.
One is to build the satellite from orbit at synchronous altitude down to the Earth, and
then anchoring it is an easier job because you can put material into it a little at a
time.
You can bootstrap if you like.
You can make a very small cable and gradually build up to a larger one.
I think that the technology we will have in 100 years' time, though, is such that things
we now consider hair-raising and scary and difficult, people will take for granted.
To give an analogy, I like to quote, if you told people 100 years ago that there'd be
hundreds of tons of metal up above the cities, they'd say, well, you could never sleep at
night because you'd be afraid they'd fall on top of you all the time.
But now people just curse aircraft because of the noise.
They don't actually think that there's hundreds of tons of metal suspended up there.
And we're not in constant fear of things collapsing because we have some trust in the
technology.
I believe 100 or 150 years from now, things we now consider hair-raising and scary will
be commonplace, which is why I chose a more way out method of anchoring the beanstalk
than the simplest one.
Though the book deals with numerous scientific concepts and theories, it's an exciting
fast-paced story that should please any reader of science fiction.
One of the non-human characters in the book is a giant squid named Caliban.
Caliban seems to be intelligent.
He lives on the artificial water world of Atlantis and communicates with humans with
the aid of a computer.
We asked Sheffield who he got the idea of using a giant squid as a character.
I needed, well, for several reasons.
One is I'm very interested in cephalopods in the squid and the octopus because they are
the most advanced invertebrate animals.
And I had known for quite a while that squids and octopus are supposed to be very smart
creatures.
So when I wanted a very difficult being to communicate with, the obvious first thought
which many people do is to have a computer as a character.
But I felt since I had a water world in Atlantis, it would be more interesting for me to create
a situation in which the sea creature, Caliban, communicates with the humans only with the
help of a computer.
In other words, the computer is an essential part of the communication process.
And the relationship between the computer and Caliban is a very complex one that even
the human characters in the book, so they don't totally know what's going on.
I simply felt that was more interesting than perhaps having a computer as an instrument.
A smart computer has been done quite a lot, but I felt the computer and cephalopod combination
hadn't been done anywhere that I could see and was a more interesting thing to write
about.
We'll continue our talk with Charles Sheffield on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon.
And Daryl Lane.
Charles Sheffield's most recent science fiction novel, published in 1982, is entitled My
Brother's Keeper, and it's a departure from his normal style.
It's a fast-paced book, as all of Sheffield's works are, but it's set in the very near
future and it reads like a spy novel.
Sheffield talks about it.
The Science Fiction aspects of the story concerns introsomatic chips, tiny microcomputer devices
which are implanted in the human body to control various physiological functions.
Twin brothers named Leo and Lionel are the main characters in the story.
Leo leads an exciting life of intrigue and danger as a government agent involved with
the introsomatic chips.
And Lionel is a conservative man who is a world-renowned concert pianist, hard of the
adventuresome type.
After a helicopter accident involving the two brothers, Leo is dying.
He is saved, in a sense, by a brilliant doctor or scientist who removes part of his brain
and attaches it to Lionel's.
Their personalities are sort of integrated then, and they slowly become one new person.
What had been happening through the book is that it begins.
Lionel, although he is the one with the consciousness, he's the one who thinks he knows who he is,
when they recover consciousness, has always been the subordinate partner.
His brother Leo had always been the stronger personality, the more outgoing one, and really
the dominant one.
Now through the book, Lionel is gradually taking on more of his brother's characteristics.
And certainly at the beginning of the book, Lionel would never have dreamed of going off
and chasing danger because it wasn't his disposition.
So that by the end, they have somewhat fused in personality to the point where it's Leo
who is really driving them along to go out and go after the criminals for the same reason
he had always done it, which is that it was the best form of excitement.
He got excitement from it, and he said at the end that there's really no thrill like it,
which is this type of chase.
But that in a sense is Leo's personality speaking by that point.
Lionel was the somewhat quiet and retiring twin, but by the end of the book,
it's no longer Lionel who is making most of the decisions.
Leo has again become the dominant twin in a psychological sense.
That's the thing I had in mind.
The brain operation which joins the two brothers is not feasible presently,
but Sheffield says it may not be too long before the technique becomes possible.
This is a typical Sheffield story and then it's based on techniques or devices that are just over the horizon
that may be possible in a decade or two.
Right. Sheffield is a convincing extrapolator too,
because he is a practicing scientist with a PhD in theoretical physics.
We ask Sheffield if he writes his stories to seriously examine such concepts,
or if he's just playing around with wild ideas.
It depends on the story.
If I believe that the device is technologically possible and that someday we will have it,
then I try to develop the consequences of that rather seriously.
And in a sense I'm attempting prediction as opposed to writing entertainment.
But on the other hand, if I don't really believe something is likely to happen at all,
then I'm writing for the fun of it.
I'm writing and don't expect to be taken seriously.
We'll continue our conversation with Charles Sheffield on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The next episode will be about the science fiction radio show.
We'll be back with a new episode of the science fiction radio show.
Stay with us!
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
One of the more fascinating collections of fantasy stories to come out in recent years
is Charles Sheffield's 1982 book, Erasmus Magister.
Sheffield is a scientist and he's noted as an author of hard science fiction stories,
but he also writes in various styles and on unexpected subjects, as Erasmus Magister demonstrates.
The title refers to the main character in all of the book's stories, Erasmus Darwin,
who lived in England's 18th century and was the grandfather of Charles Darwin.
We asked Sheffield if Erasmus was a real historical figure.
Yes, I've been interested in him for a long time.
As somebody I found much more fascinating as a personality than his grandson Charles Darwin.
Erasmus Darwin I had known about since I first went to Cambridge,
because he attended the same college at Cambridge as I did,
and there were books about him in the library and so on.
And so I have an early fascination with him.
And I found him especially interesting because he did so many different things.
And was a poet and a philosopher and an inventor and a famous physician.
And he used just a fascinating combination.
I decided that what I would try to do would be to have him apply his powers of observation,
which were famous throughout Europe in his day.
He was noted for being able to diagnose diseases by looking at people and observing them closely.
I decided that that power of observation would serve him well if he had to solve other mysteries.
He was also a person who was strongly rationalistic.
He didn't believe in supernatural explanations.
So I decided there that it would be logical for him, through his powers of observation and deduction,
to seek and find rational explanations to things that everyone else in the story thought were supernatural,
which was very reasonable.
200 years ago, people were very ready to believe supernatural answers to most things.
So that was the logic behind the stories.
There are three stories in the volume.
The Devil of Malcourc, the Treasure of Odorex, and the Lambeth of Mortal.
And they're extremely difficult to categorize. Sheffield talks about them.
They were published in different places, and it's an interesting point.
The first one was published as a fantasy in Fantastic Stories.
The second one was published in Alfred Hitchcock's Mystery Magazine.
And the third one, in Time, I'm talking now, in Data Publication, was published in Fantasy and Science Fiction.
Now, in practice, the Devil of Malcourc was the last one written.
That's the first one in the Erasers' Magister, but I wrote that last.
But I was not quite sure when I was writing them, whether I was writing science fiction or fantasy,
or some type of historical detective.
And I finally decided it really didn't make any difference.
I was trying to tell a story about what I consider to be a very interesting real person,
and I tried to get the facts about Erasmus Darwin accurate,
so that I was not doing any distortion to his beliefs and views or life history.
But I permitted myself license when it came to the things that happened to him.
So it was interesting. It was a very interesting set of stories to write.
Sort of very difficult to write. I don't know why.
Perhaps because I was trying to put myself back in the 18th century framework.
In each story, there is an apparently supernatural happening or creature
that puzzles or bedevils some part of England.
The first story, the Devil of Malcourc, for instance, deals with what we today call a Loch Ness Monster.
The stories are delightful reading. They're exciting, highly literate,
and convincingly communicate the atmosphere of the 18th century English countryside.
A reader of science fiction will find them to be different fare, certainly,
but all the more enjoyable and refreshing because they are.
Sheffield says there will be more Erasmus Darwin stories too, so keep an eye out for them.
We'll finish our conversation with Charles Sheffield on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The next episode will be about the science fiction radio show.
We'll be back with a new episode of the science fiction radio show.
Stay with us!
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon.
And Daryl Lane.
Though Charles Sheffield is noted as an author of hard science fiction stories,
he sometimes writes narratives which are fantastic or humorous.
His stories on Erasmus Darwin, for example, are illustrations of historical fantasy,
but he's also done a series of stories that are pure humor.
And at least once, that humor had a larger purpose or message to it.
The story entitled The Man Who Stole the Moon,
which appeared in the December 1980 edition of the Science Fiction Paperback magazine,
Destiny's, made a serious comment on the United States space program.
But it did so in a humorous way, with a clever twist on one of Robert Heinlein's
classic short stories, The Man Who Solved the Moon.
We asked Sheffield if he meant that story to have a strong message,
and if he's had much reader response to it.
It was very much influenced by Heinlein's story, The Man Who Solved the Moon,
and it was preaching a bit.
And I think that's an example where you said there was a message,
and I said I was preaching, but I haven't really had any response.
And I'm not quite sure what response I would expect for that.
I think that most people who read it and approve of it
are already upset that the way we seem to be unable to have an effective space program.
So the only sort of letters I might think I would get would be people who would agree with it.
The humorous series that he's done involves two bumbling lawyers named Henry Carver and Waldo Burmeister.
These stories seem to have no messages or preaching at all.
They're pure farcical humor, cleverly done and chock-full of puns.
A couple of their titles indicate their farcical nature,
the Dalmatian of Faust and Parasites Lost.
Sheffield calls the stories his sewage series.
We ask him why.
Well, because the two of the first three involved...
Well, let me put it differently.
The first one of all was one involving the Matting Link,
which was not particularly loathsome in any way.
But then the next one was about one of the lawyers who was working in charge of the sewers on a space station.
That was Dinsdale Descent, and duly falls into the sewer.
Then another one, which is the Dalmatian of Faust,
the same individual again falls into a different sewer.
And generally speaking, I regard those stories as stories in which I take ideas that people have said are gross and unpleasant and loathsome and disgusting,
and put them into stories.
And one evening at dinner, we made a long list of things that people found generally distasteful,
and the suggestion was I should just write my way through the list until I got to the end.
And I find that that's all right to a limited extent if you're writing what you hope a humorous story is,
like Parasite's Lost is about a truffle pig,
and the Deemos Plague is another in a series in which a man has to safeguard two large pigs, taking them out to Mars.
The stories generally are not intended to have any message, as you might say, the man who stole the moon has,
or any redeeming features.
I just write them because I find them amusing.
It's very hard to tell whether readers find them amusing or not.
We ask Sheffield if he'll write any more of these humorous stories.
Well, I have one that's sitting there somewhat, I've got about eight pages, and I stopped and did other things.
A story called Space Opera, which involves the same characters,
and what happens when this producer decides to stage a modern opera which has been written.
It's called Balaclava, and they decide to stage it in free fall with the charge of the light brigade and other complications.
But I haven't written the rest of it because I've been too busy writing other things.
It's sitting there over on the desk there, and sometime I'll write it.
But I write those occasionally with no fixed timetable, just when I feel like it.
Let's hope Charles Sheffield gets some more of these stories out. Humor and science fiction can be refreshing.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show